Define ping/pong payload extensions (#348)
ethereum/portal-network-specs: ping-payload-extensions/ping-custom-payload-extensions.md

ErrorPayload = Container(
  type: 65535,
  payload: error_payload
)
```

### Error Code's

#### 0: Extension not supported
This code should be returned if the extension isn't supported. This error should only be returned if 
- The extension isn't supported
- The extension isn't a required extension for specified Portal Network.

#### 1: Requested data not found
This error code should be used when a client is unable to provide the necessary data for the response.

#### 2: Failed to decode payload
Wasn't able to decode the payload

#### 3: System error
A critical error happened and the ping can't be processed

## Standard extensions

Every Portal Network Client is required to support 3 extensions
- [Type 0: Capabilities Payload](extensions/type-0.md): useful for finding what ping extensions a client supports
- Sub-network standard extension. For history this is currently [Type 2: History Radius Payload](extensions/type-2.md). For State and Beacon the base extension is [Type 1: Basic Radius Payload](extensions/type-1.md). These are extensions what are crucial. This standard extensions are specified the respective sub-networks specification  

> - Type 3: [Get Client info Payload](extensions/type-3.md)

Reviewer: I suggest we remove this from the standard set.  Clients *should* support it but I don't think it makes sense to make it be required.

Author: I think it is fine to make it so a valid option is an empty string for privacy inclined users, but I don't think we should remove it, as 99.9% of honest Portal nodes would support it. ` Client Info` is important for 
- getting better statistics of our network, 
  - useful for glados
  - tells us what platforms our popular and we should support better e.x. x86/arm/riscv5
- allows us to better track what client is creating bugs on the network. Are they running an old commit? Is it a CPU architecture specific issue? etc

If this isn't a default extension it would require 
- one ping to get `capabilities`
- one ping to get `client info`

If 99.9% of honest clients are going to support this call, I think it should be a standard extension, with an opt out to return an empty string by the 0.001% of users which have a privacy concern.

Reviewer: I think I agree with this.  Will set the default path towards clients supporting this which I think is positive for network monitoring/health.

Reviewer 2: If it is fine to just be an empty string, then it is a bit silly to send this around as another message req/rep.

Perhaps just add it as a field in the capabilities extension?

Author: I will update the PR to make it so client info is a part of the capabilities extension, this will limit the max amount of ping extensions a client can have enabled at a time to 450 or 400 instead of 500 to reserve byte space for the client enough, but 400 extensions should be more then enough so it isn't a deal breaker at the end of the day.

Reviewer 2: To be honest, I don't think anybody would want to be writing Portal implementations if they have to deal with 400 (or even 40 for that matter) ping extensions :).

## What is the [Type 0: Capabilities Payload](extensions/type-0.md) for
It is for Portal implementations which want to see what extensions a peer supports. Not all extensions need to be implemented by all parties. So in order for a peer to find if an extension is implemented a [Type 0: Capabilities Payload](extensions/type-0.md) should be exchanged.

Non-required extension offer a way for Portal implementations to offer extended functionality to its users without requiring every Portal implementing party to agree to a new feature. This allows for a diverse set of use cases to be fulfilled without requiring every implementer implement every extension, or requiring the need to bloat the minimal [Portal-Wire-Protocol](../portal-wire-protocol.md) with new `Message Types`.

## Does implementing non-standard-extensions require a hardfork?

> No only changing a sub-networks standard extension requires a hard fork.

Author: A hard fork is just a rule change that occurs on all clients. In this case it would just be a timestamp which when reached all Portal clients would change X functionality for the base Portal Protocol.

Hardforks will be required regardless I expect in the future, there will be networking changes we make to calls other then ping/pong. To ensure a smooth not breaking change hardforks, might be a good way to do this.

Another way to do this could potentially be adding some kind of Portal Version message, where clients would always speak in the oldest version or something along those lines, but I feel that solution would be a lot more complex than hard forks. Ping/Pong is only a small part of the `Portal Wire Spec` which could change over time. We don't want to break interop when shipping `Portal Wire Spec` upgrades in the future. Ping Extensions make needing 
- hard forks less common
- and less bloat to the core `Portal Wire Spec`

to name a few

If we want to use a different term then "hard fork", I am fine with that and I am open to suggestions. I struggle to think of a better understood word to describe what is happening though.

> No only changing a sub-networks standard extension requires a hard fork.

Reviewer 2: my concern is not so much about semantics, but rather about the fact that you still require to have a client aligned release mechanism, see also comment at https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs/pull/348#discussion_r1852076396

> No only changing a sub-networks standard extension requires a hard fork.

Reviewer 3: I agree that using the term 'hard fork' doesn't sound right. Portal doesn't take part in consensus and doesn't really fork because it's not a blockchain in itself. Of course we can have breaking protocol changes that require all clients to be updated at the same time so perhaps a better term would be 'breaking protocol change' or 'non backwards compatible protocol upgrade'.

> No only changing a sub-networks standard extension requires a hard fork.

Author: > I agree that using the term 'hard fork' doesn't sound right. Portal doesn't take part in consensus and doesn't really fork because it's not a blockchain in itself. Of course we can have breaking protocol changes that require all clients to be updated at the same time so perhaps a better term would be 'breaking protocol change' or 'non backwards compatible protocol upgrade'.

```
A hard fork is a type of update to a blockchain protocol that is not backward-compatible. This means that nodes (computers running the blockchain software) must upgrade to the new protocol to remain part of the blockchain network. Nodes that do not update will follow the older protocol, resulting in a split in the blockchain into two separate networks.
```

`breaking protocol change` or `non backwards compatible protocol upgrade` sounds like somebody is trying to say or describe Hardfork, without saying hardfork. A hard fork is a breaking protocol chain, that could be related to consensus, or the p2p protocol. A hard fork describes a break in the road which splits a network into 2. A `non backwards compatible protocol upgrade` is a hardfork, as it forks the p2p network into 2 which can't talk with each other.

> No only changing a sub-networks standard extension requires a hard fork.

Reviewer 3: > ```
> A hard fork is a type of update to a blockchain protocol that is not backward-compatible. This means that nodes (computers running the blockchain software) must upgrade to the new protocol to remain part of the blockchain network. Nodes that do not update will follow the older protocol, resulting in a split in the blockchain into two separate networks.
> ```

Portal isn't exactly a blockchain protocol, it's a p2p network that contains blockchain data which follows a blockchain protocol. The term fork comes from the fact that the block history forks. If bittorrent had a breaking change, it wouldn't be called a hard fork. Anyway, its just semantics I guess.

> No only changing a sub-networks standard extension requires a hard fork.

Author: > > ```
> > A hard fork is a type of update to a blockchain protocol that is not backward-compatible. This means that nodes (computers running the blockchain software) must upgrade to the new protocol to remain part of the blockchain network. Nodes that do not update will follow the older protocol, resulting in a split in the blockchain into two separate networks.
> > ```
> 
> Portal isn't exactly a blockchain protocol, it's a p2p network that contains blockchain data which follows a blockchain protocol. The term fork comes from the fact that the block history forks. If bittorrent had a breaking change, it wouldn't be called a hard fork. Anyway, its just semantics I guess.

I think this is very fair and it is a symantic issue, ideally their is a single word to refer to `non backwards compatible protocol upgrade` as it is a bit long when talking. One issue with breaking P2P changes on Portal is we don't share a protocol version with peers. Of course breaking p2p changes can happen on more then just the ping/pong wire message. Most Protocols like bittorrent would support a range of protocol versions and have a negotiation stage to find out what is the shared minimum version supported. The issue with Portal is we don't have any of that infrastructure as we don't have that type of handshake. So I do think we are constrained to do breaking changes through timestamps as Portal connections are shortlived, and Portal's P2P protocol has no idea of a version.

> No only changing a sub-networks standard extension requires a hard fork.

Reviewer: I'm :-1: on using the term hard fork for this.  It name collides with the core protocol terminology and will be confusing. I recognize that the term may be correct in definition but the name collision is a deal breaker for me. 

I also will re-iterate that I don't think we should try to define how this process will work because I don't think we know and trying to define it corners us into future behavior that may not be necessary or optimal.  We should leave this process undefined.

> No only changing a sub-networks standard extension requires a hard fork.

Author: sure, I updated the PR to remove the term

## How do sub-network standard extension's work
sub-network standard extension's are fundamental extensions that are required for a Portal sub-network to function. They must be supported by the sub-networks implementations.

### What is the process for changing a sub-network standard extension

The process of changing a Portal sub-networks standard extension is through a hard fork set by a timestamp. When the timestamp is reached usage of the old standard extension is replaced by the new standard extension. Details on what standard extensions for what networks are being replace are specified in the fork's document.

> 

Reviewer 2: For me the usefulness of these ping/pong payload extensions is to avoid having to do something like this in the first place.

If we don't avoid this hard-forking, then I don't really understand the point of adding this complexity.

But imo it is possible to do it without hard-forking, as is also explained in the chapter below this?

Reviewer: I would suggest that we remove this section and leave the process undefined.  I think we are getting into the realm of over-specifying this piece of the protocol.

Author: A client would never need to call `capabilities` to know what the current standard extension is.

The usefulness of ping extensions is not requiring all parties to agree to make a change to the protocol or add a feature.

Of course supporting the base protocol is required i.e. `standard extensions`, but this allows Portal clients to make optimizations such as the "welcome basket" proposal  https://github.com/ethereum/portal-network-specs/issues/350 Carver proposed, without requiring all implementations to support it. Which is important as we don't want new features to gate keep new clients from joining the network, but also not all clients would likely support "welcome baskets" it is a p2p optimization which isn't required by the core protocol to work. It is a bootstrapping optimization.

Ping extensions don't change the base protocol much, new clients can just return empty for `capabilities` and only support X networks `standard extension`. `Ping Extensions` is opt in and hence it prevents creating a situation of the protocol being "too tall to ride( or participate/implement a client)."

If a client wants a feature what is not popular or doesn't make sense for all clients to implement it they can, which I think is important long term. Especially as not only L1 will be using Portal. The base Portal P2P protocol should be simple, and Ping extensions allow us to keep it simple. Well still allowing for clients to experiment or add new features, which maybe one day become standard extensions if they become popular, but there is no requirement for that, which is one of the important parts of this proposal.

Reviewer 2: My comment is not about the usefulness of the extensions. It is about this specific section which talks about the requirement of a hard fork.

I think this should be designed in such way that a hard fork is not required at all, else I don't see the point of it, and with the capabilities extension this should be feasible.

Author: Are we assuming
1. ping's are only done by long-lived connections i.e. the other node is in your routing table? All short lived connections are done through `find nodes` or `find content` RFC/RFN etc

or 

2. ping's are sent by both long-lived and short-lived connections. 

?

If 1. is true I think a forkless mechanism makes sense as the cost of calling `capabilities` is only high if the connection is `shortlived`. If ping isn't used for `short-lived connections`, then the additional latency incurred isn't a big deal.

if 2. is true I think the `fork upgrade method for standard extensions make sense` as it wouldn't make sense to upgrade via `capabilities` unless

- So for "close nodes" upgrading to the newest protocol or using extensions could make sense as those will be long lived connections in the routing table
- if you are trying to request meta data, calling `capabilities` would make sense
- participate in features not supported by the full node set

but if you were a `short-lived ping connection`, upgrading wouldn't make sense, only using the base standard extension required by the protocol would make sense

I need to put more thought into this as these are only my additional thoughts. I didn't conceive 1. could be an option till just now so I still need to spend time thinking which assumption is actually true 1. or 2.

A forkless method makes a lot of sense for `devp2p` as they only have long-lived connections. Since Portal is by default a `short-lived` protocol, having a `forked upgrade method for the base standard extensions required by the protocol` makes sense if 2. is true, as you wouldn't want to incur the latency for short-lived connections.

Author: I guess there is more thinking to be done, some of this we would only need to worry about when we propose the first breaking change so I don't think we need to pick a path immediately 

The 2 paths I see are

1. We always require `capabilities` is called first to find the latest shared version of the respective subnetworks `standard extension`. This path would be `forkless`, but it would always occur 1 additional round trip delay initially to make a `standard extension` ping, as there could be multiple support `standard extension` in this system

2. We do a `fork` system, where all client implementations would always support a base `standard extension` for the subnetwork to work/function. This system would make it optional if an implementation wanted to call `capabilities` or not and hence would not have the additional RT time unless opted into.

Both have trade offs, to ask bluntly which path do you want to do?

# Ping Custom Payload Extensions

## The problem

Over time we will need to change what is sent over ping/pong `custom_payload`'s to adjust for what is needed in the future.
Currently the only way to update a `custom_payload` is through breaking changes which break protocol compatible between Portal implementations.
As we get users, deploying breaking changes to mainnet will no longer be an option as we are aiming for a 100% uptime.

## The Solution

> Ping Payload Extensions. There is a minimal set of `standard extensions` which require a fork hard fork to change. This framework allows Portal clients to implement `non standard extensions` which don't require a hard fork to deploy to the network. A more flexible way to extend the Protocol without bloating the [Portal-Wire-Protocol](../portal-wire-protocol.md)

Reviewer: I'm not sure that the "problem/solution" belongs in the spec.  Once this is merged, the "problem" part is no longer applicable and I think feels awkward.

I would remove the "problem" part and change "the solution" part to be "motivation" and include the parts from the problem statement about needing a way to communicate meta data without modifying the base protocol.

# Type's

There are 65536 unique type ids.

Types 0-10_000 and 65436-65535 are reserved for for future upgrades.

The rest are first come first serve, but they should still be defined in this repo to avoid overlaps.

## Requirements

All payloads used in the Ping `custom_payload` MUST follow the `Ping Custom Payload Extensions` format.

## Custom Payload Extensions Format

- **type**: what payload type is it

> - **payload**: a ssz ByteList of max length 1100 which contents are specified the type field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **payload**: the SSZ encoded extension payload
```

```python
CustomPayloadExtensionsFormat = Container(
  type: u16,
  payload: ByteList[max_length=1100]
)
```

## Ping vs Pong
The relationship between Ping and Pong message will be determined by the requirements of the type.

> Currently type 1,2,3 are mirrored formats, but there is room for a Ping `custom_payload` to specify details about what it wants to request, then pong handles it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Currently type 1,2,3 are symmetrical, having the same payload for both request and response.  This symmetry is not required.  Extensions may define separate payloads for Ping and Pong within the same type.
```

### Error responses
If the ping receiver can't handle the ping for any reason the pong should return an error payload

Pong payload
```python

# Max ASCII hex encoded strings length
MAX_ERROR_BYTE_LENGTH = 300

error_payload = SSZ.serialize(Container(error_code: u16, message: ByteList[MAX_ERROR_BYTE_LENGTH]))

ErrorPayload = Container(
  type: 65535,
  payload: error_payload
)
```

### Error Code's

#### 0: Extension not supported
This code should be returned if the extension isn't supported. This error should only be returned if 
- The extension isn't supported
- The extension isn't a required extension for specified Portal Network.

#### 1: Requested data not found

> This error code is for if an extension is asking for something and it doesn't exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This error code should be used when a client is unable to provide the necessary data for the response.
```

# Type's

There are 65536 unique type ids.

Types 0-10_000 and 65436-65535 are reserved for for future upgrades.

The rest are first come first serve, but they should still be defined in this repo to avoid overlaps.

## Requirements

All payloads used in the Ping `custom_payload` MUST follow the `Ping Custom Payload Extensions` format.

## Custom Payload Extensions Format

- **type**: numeric identifier which tells clients how the `payload` field should be decoded.
- **payload**: the SSZ encoded extension payload

```python
CustomPayloadExtensionsFormat = Container(
  type: u16,
  payload: ByteList[max_length=1100]
)
```

## Ping vs Pong
The relationship between Ping and Pong message will be determined by the requirements of the type.

Currently type 0, 1, and 2 are symmetrical, having the same payload for both request and response. This symmetry is not required. Extensions may define separate payloads for Ping and Pong within the same type.

### Error responses
If the ping receiver can't handle the ping for any reason the pong should return an error payload

[Type 65535: The definition of error responses can be found here](extensions/type-65535.md)

## Standard extensions

> A standard extension is an extension which all nodes on the network can assume all other clients support, without requiring a `Type 0: Client Info, Radius, and Capabilities Payload` to discover what extensions the client supports. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A standard extension is an extension which all nodes on the network MUST support. Nodes can send these without requiring a `Type 0: Client Info, Radius, and Capabilities Payload` request to discover what extensions the client supports. 
```

Changing standard extensions is considered a breaking change.

List of some standard extensions
- [Type 0: Client Info, Radius, and Capabilities Payload](extensions/type-0.md): useful for finding Client Info, Radius, and ping extensions a client supports

> 

Reviewer 2: Should we not add type `65535` also as a standard extension? All nodes MUST be able to return errors...

## The problem

Over time we will need to change what is sent over ping/pong `custom_payload`'s to adjust for what is needed in the future.
Currently the only way to update a `custom_payload` is through breaking changes which break protocol compatible between Portal implementations.
As we get users, deploying breaking changes to mainnet will no longer be an option as we are aiming for a 100% uptime.

## The Solution

Ping Custom Payload Extensions. A versioned type prefixed format where we can upgrade endpoints on a new version well giving a window for all Portal implementations to update before deprecating the older version. This will allow clients to implement new functionality without breaking compatibility with the standard specification.

# Type's

There are 4_294_967_296 unique type ids.

Types 0-10_000 and 4_294_957_295-4_294_967_296 are reserved for for future upgrades.

The rest are first come first serve, but they should still be defined in this repo to avoid overlaps.

## Requirements

All payloads used in the Ping `custom_payload` MUST follow the `Ping Custom Payload Extensions` format.

## Custom Payload Extensions Format

- **type**: what payload type is it

> - **verison**: what version of the type it is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **version**: what version of the type it is
```

- **payload**: a ssz container which contents are specified by the type and version field

```python
CustomPayloadExtensionsFormat = Container(
  type: Bytes4,
  version: Bytes4,
  payload: Container(inner payload is defined by type and version)

> )

Reviewer 2: The way this currently is defined, it means that one has to write some custom code to only decode the encoded type and version, at which point it can then know how to decode the other `Container`.

Unless you meant to have the `payload` to be a `ByteList` which then could be decoded in a second step based on the type/version information after decoding the `CustomPayloadExtensionsFormat` `Container`.  That would be a possible solution for this.
Or as `Ping.payload` is already a `ByteList`, another way might be to just prefix it with those bytes that indicated the type & version. Either way would work.

```

## Ping vs Pong
The relationship between Ping and Pong message will be determined by the requirements of the type/version.

Currently type 1,2,3 are mirrored formats, but there is room for a Ping `custom_payload` to specify details about what it wants to request, then pong handles it.

### Error responses
If the ping receiver can't handle the ping for any reason the pong should return an error payload

Pong payload
```python

# Max ASCII hex encoded strings length
MAX_ERROR_BYTE_LENGTH = 300

CustomPayloadExtensionsFormat = Container(
  type: 4_294_967_295,
  version: 1,

>   payload: Container(error_code: Bytes4, message: ByteList[MAX_ERROR_BYTE_LENGTH])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  payload: Container(error_code: uint16, message: ByteList[MAX_ERROR_BYTE_LENGTH])
```

Reviewer: Should have given some context here. I would think `u16` is enough.

- Identical payload definitions can be re-used across multiple networks.
- We are in a byte-constrained packet so I'm inclined to be a little stingy with our bytes.
- It's ok if completely disparate use cases end up colliding on the same `type` numbers since the data won't be mixed across network boundaries, which suggest that 65k is a plenty big-enough namespace for us.

)
```

### Error Code's

- 0: Extension not supported
- 1: Requested data not found

> - 2: System error

Reviewer: If we're going to provide suggested error codes, I would suggest we expand this a bit and include clear language around how we suggest they be used that includes examples.
